>> Good afternoon, my name is James Dempsey.
I am an engineer in the Cocoa Frameworks Team
and I focus on application accessibility.
So wow, what a week, I have had a tremendous week.
Just by show of applause, what kind
of week have you had here at WWC 2009?
[ Applause ]
And just 5 days of tons and tons of
information and it is 2 o'clock on Friday
and you are all here, tell me more
things, fill my brain more.
That is a long plane ride home, I need more to think about.
So excellent, thank you for coming
out to Advanced Accessibility.
So what are we going to do today, first this is marked
as an expert or an advanced session, so as I am talking,
I am assuming that you have some familiarity
with application accessibility on Mac OS X,
things like the accessibility hierarchy and UI elements,
tools like accessibility inspector
and the Voiceover feature on Mac OS X.
Let's talk about what we are going to talk about.
So first, we are going to walk through some of the larger
things that are new in Snow Leopard, things we have added.
Then we are going to do a very brief, technical review
of application accessibility, because it is hard to talk
about advanced things if the conceptual model that
we have in our head doesn't quite match reality,
and then we are going to spend the bulk of this session
on making or talking about making custom views accessible.
And for our example, we are going to take the venerable
Cocoa sample application Sketch and we are going
to make the graphics view in Sketch
accessible using some new accessibility roles
and attributes that we have added in Snow Leopard.
It is a very nice example in that it lets us focus on some
design issues, some of which I don't think we have covered
in previous WWDC sessions, and walk through a
recommended process, kind of step by step how do we tend
to make views accessible at Apple, and finally we
will talk a little bit about some trouble shooting.
So what is new in Snow Leopard?
One of the things we have added in Snow Leopard are new
sets or kind of a couple suites of new accessibility roles
and sub-roles, very much focused on the things that you
might find, well one particularly on the web or office style
or applications, like spreadsheets or presentations
or even the page layout portions of a word processor.
And so we have added support for cell
based tables, there is a new AXCell role,
and it is able to convey information
about things like column and row spans.
We have added some additional parameterized attributes to
make it very simple for an assistive application to move
through tables that are cell based without
necessarily having to read in everything to figure
out the column and row spans and how to navigate.
And some new cell related notifications and attributes,
so you can find out when the selected
cells change and the like.
These are in use, actually, you
can see them in action in iWork 09.
They are also present in the latest
version of Safari and WebKit.
And then layout areas, these attributes and roles are
designed for use in any case where you have a canvas
like area, a page layout area,
anytime you have those rectangles
with the resizing handles, and you
can change the layout of things.
That is where this set of roles and
attributes is designed to be used.
Now that is exactly what we are going to be using
to make Sketch accessible, so I won't dwell on that,
you will see more details when we get to Sketch.
And then we have also added some roles for level indicators
and the various types of level indicators and content lists.
And those are roles for opposed to user
interface that you might interact with as a list,
like maybe a single column table, a content list
is more if you had a bulleted list on a webpage.
It is not something that is a control that the user can
necessarily interact with, but we still want to call
out that additional structure in the content.
We have also added some new functionality in Snow Leopard.
The first is NSImage accessibility descriptions,
where you can very easily take an NSImage
and just set the accessibility
description string on the image itself.
When that image gets used in a button cell or
an image cell or a segmented control segment,
Cocoa will automatically pick up that
accessibility description and report it for you.
This was talked about in greater detail
in the session earlier this week.
We have added support to NSMenu items can
now support-overridden string attributes,
so if your menus happen to be just a graphic with no
text, it is very simple now to add a description to those.
We have added-- or I should say we have exposed three
methods in Snow Leopard that are optional methods
in the accessibility protocol, and these all deal
with attributes of an object that are array attributes
that are array attributes that return many items.
Of course in our accessibility hierarchy,
the most important of those is AXChildren.
And by default when an accessibility client asks us for
the count of one of these attributes or for a sub-set
of these attributes or sub-range of these attributes,
by default, AppKit will get the list of all of them
and then perform an array operation on them.
Now sometimes, especially when you have many
children, you may have a better way of doing that,
where you don't have to necessarily create every
single accessibility object to return the right answer.
If that is the case in your code, then
this is when you would use these methods.
The other nice thing is that these methods actually will
work all the way back to, no not even Panther, Jaguar.
So implementing them today for
Snow Leopard, you will still get
that performance benefit even back
on previous versions of Mac OS X.
And there are many more kinds of smaller changes
or improvements that we have made in Snow Leopard
and they are noted in the AppKit release notes for 10-6.
OK that said, let's do a brief talk about review, the
architecture of application accessibility on the Mac.
It is a client server architecture essentially, now we
have three applications running, an application or process
like Voiceover launches and it uses accessibility
client APIs, public APIs on Mac OS X called AX APIs
that is the prefix that they use, and it begins
sending accessibility request to your process.
And your process responds to them, and is
basically a nice little client server set up.
But what is every application on the system vending?
Well apps vend a hierarchy of UI elements and
so each node in the tree represents some piece
of the user interface in your application.
Note that the root of the tree is the application
itself, and that is the exception to the rule.
It is not a visual thing, you can't see
the application except for that root,
every other node in the tree represents
some visual element in your applications,
something that is taking up some
degree of screen real estate.
Now each of these nodes is very powerful in that an
accessibility client can ask for information about each
of these UI elements through attributes,
and in this case, one very important
and useful attribute is the role attribute.
And underneath each of these element reps, which is
the lightweight representation on the client side,
you will note something like AXApplication,
AXWindow, the role is how you can tell
or how an accessibility client can
tell one UI element from another.
And that is an example of an attribute that
can be requested by a client about an element.
There are also actions, so for instance in accessibility
client could tell that AXButton element to press,
and that request would come in and the button
would actually press in the application itself.
And then finally, an accessibility client can register to
receive notifications about any particular node in that tree
to find out things like when the value of a text
field changes, or when a window moves or resizes.
Now how does that information get
handed back to the accessibility client?
Every node in the tree that was reported to an
accessibility client has a one-to-one mapping
to some object in a Cocoa application.
These are all kind of possibly
self-evident the NSApplication.
There is that NSApplication singleton instance in your app.
Every AXWindow is backed by an NSWindow.
And when a request comes in about that node in the tree that
request gets routed to an object in your Cocoa application,
and a method is called to ask that object for information.
And we have batched all those methods up into
a protocol called the NSAccessibility protocol.
So again, very client-servery, the client makes a request,
but the request gets routed to the right Cocoa object,
which implements a set of methods and returns from
that method the right answer for that request.
Now let's just take a brief look at that
protocol, we will be seeing it in code much later,
but there is a set of methods for
getting and setting attributed values.
We also have some fancier attributes, which take a parameter
for things like text cell based tables and lay out areas.
Sometimes you want to have the
client provide some information
to get a more specific answer for performing actions.
And then in addition, although it is not part
of the protocol, the convenience function
for posting a notification, so your custom Cocoa
class can post an accessibility notification.
Now how does the client get a hold
of this information in your app?
Well it can do so top down, the client can just
say, Hey for this process, give me the root element.
And that NSApplication will get sent back, well a
representation of that application object will get set back
as a UI element ref and then from there a very
useful attribute is the AXChildren's attribute.
And so when that accessibility client ask for the
children, a request will come into NSApplication,
call the right method and NSApplication will send back an
array of Cocoa objects, in this case probably an NSMenu
that is the top level menu and a bunch of
NSWindows that are the children of the application.
And calling this recursively then, an
accessibility client is able to create a whole tree
that maps to your application's user interface.
Now in addition to top down, a client can also
go bottom up, and they can do so by hit testing,
handing in a point on the screen and asking
the app, Tell me what UI element is there.
And Cocoa will do the hit test, identify the
object and return a UI element ref for that object
and then using the AXParent attribute, the accessibility
client is able to navigate back up the tree.
Now the reason I am spending so much time on this hierarchy
is that those two attributes, AXChildren and AXParent
in getting that hierarchy correct is really one of the
central tasks in making your custom view accessible.
Now to assist in that hit testing, there is another
method accessibility hit test in the protocol,
we also can tell in the assistive
app what is the focused UI element,
who has the keyboard focus, so a method to help with that.
And then a method to talk about whether an
object is ignored by accessibility or not.
And that bears mentioning for a moment.
So you may notice that in Cocoa, we actually have a much
more complicated view hierarchy, even in the simple window
with one button in it example, than we are reporting
to accessibility that window has a private frame view
and a public content view and an NSButton
view or control which has a button cell,
and yet we are only reporting three things to accessibility.
And that is mainly because just as a user looking at the
screen would say there is a window with a button in it.
That is pretty much the structure we
would want to report to accessibility.
And so to allow for this reduction of complexity,
any piece of that hierarchy, that view hierarchy,
actually that piece of any Cocoa object
could be ignored by accessibility.
Ignored is not the same as hidden, when you hide
something, it and all its sub-views disappear from view.
When you ignore something that
is telling accessibility to pass
through to the first un-ignored
child or set of un-ignored children.
And ignored is very important, it is the first topic
thing we are going to look at in Sketch, because NSView,
the class itself, if you put one into a window,
it is not terribly interesting to a user.
It draws its little grey background and that is about it.
And so by default NSViews, the NSView class is ignored
by accessibility, when you create a custom view,
you need to make it un-ignored by accessibility.
And so if we take a look at Sketch as it existed for a long
time now, if we look at it from an accessibility standpoint,
there is an application, Sketch app, has a window.
There is actually a scroll view that
reports itself to accessibility.
It is un-ignored by default, but then
inside that scroll view, there is nothing.
It is blank, because that custom
SKT graphics view is ignored.
So let's jump off the bat and let's address that,
so the first step is making our
custom view show up in accessibility.
So let's head over to the demo.
All right, and first let's just build and run.
And I will open up a sample document here, and looking at
this with accessibility in Inspector, you will notice that--
OK we see this window is reporting
itself, but if we move the mouse in here,
it reports there is a scroll area, but nothing inside of it.
None of the graphics area shows
up, none of these shapes show up,
it's pretty much from an accessibility
standpoint, just a dead area.
We don't know what is going on in there.
The first step is, to first make it
un-ignored, so let's quit and do that.
Again it is the SKT graphic view, which is
the view that is drawing that graphic view
and you will notice it is just a straight
sub-class of NSView, so it inherits the ignoredness.
What I have done is added a category
on SKT graphic view for accessibility,
and very commonly when you are doing accessibility, you
will put all of the accessibility methods and overrides
in a category just so you have them all in one spot.
And all I am going to do very simply is
override accessibilityIsIgnored to return No.
We will build and run.
I hit the wrong thing there.
And I do that, now when I mouse over, there
is something inside of that scroll area.
It is unknown, but there is something there.
That is progress.
Why is it unknown?
Well NSView has no idea what.
It is going to be sub-classed to be turned into-- so
all it knows at this point is I am a view, here I am,
but I don't know what I am supposed to be doing.
We are going to set the proper role
next, because it is pretty darn easy.
So let's quit, I will hide that.
So again, we are already getting some information
from NSView, we are already getting some role,
we just want to override the existing information.
And so we are going to override the method,
accessibilityAttributeValue, which is actually--
where a great deal of your accessibility customization
happens in overrides or in implementations of this method.
And if we are asked for our role attributes, we are
going to return the layout area role that is the new role
that covers these areas where people do layouts.
And if they are asking about some other
value or some other attribute value,
we will just let the super-class NSView handle that.
So let's give that a run.
I will get rid of that, and now you notice our role
is reporting itself correctly, and in addition,
the role description has changed
from unknown to layout area.
That is because NWViews implementation is dynamic
and is going to ask itself for its own role
and then provide the correct system-provided
localized string for the role description.
I would like to point out that one other thing is that,
we wrote what one line of code, two lines of code,
yet we are getting a lot of accessibility
information that is already implemented in NSView.
You will notice that it already knows who our parent is.
It already knows our window top-level element.
If we focus on it, it is giving us back the correct
highlighted rectangle for its size and position.
So we get a lot free from NSView, we
just have to tweak a little in this case.
So that is a start, let's jump back to slides
and talk about making this more accessible.
Let's go. So making custom views accessible--
that really is the meat and potatoes
of doing accessibility in your applications.
In the talk earlier this week, there are a lot of
relatively easy things to do to improve the accessibility
that have a giant effect in your application,
like adding descriptions to images and making sure
that text fields are linked up to say their
title UI element to give a lot of context
to what is going on in the user interface.
And those are relatively simple and have a great affect.
But almost every application has some meat and
potatoes view, some reason why you wrote the app
in the first place and very often, those are custom views.
Sketch is a good example, the reason
we wrote the app was to have this place
where we could create and manipulate graphics.
Although these views across many
applications are very different,
the process that we go through to make a view
accessible is actually very similar every single time.
It really breaks down to three different phases.
There is a design phase, where we
figure out the basic structure.
Before we start doing things, we have to figure
out, well, What do we actually want this to look
like to accessibility? What hierarchy
do we want to be reporting?
What nodes should be in the tree?
and then, What should the roles be of those nodes?
And then once we figure out what we are actually trying to
provide to accessibility, the next step is taking a look
at how we want to provide, take a look at the
objects and the object hierarchy that we are using
in our application, and mapping between the two.
What views need to be ignored?
What views do we need to do a little work in?
Once we get that basic structure and designs,
we should build it out and phase 2 for me is,
get this all able to be inspected and
working in accessibility Inspector.
We want to have the parent and child
relationship of that tree working correctly.
We want to be able to hit test with the mouse,
and we also want the size and position working.
Now to me this second phase is really
the-- I don't even know what the word is,
it is the crux of making your app accessible.
It is the crest of the hill, if you will.
And then the last phase, once you
have that basic structure in place,
it really is a matter of filling in the remaining pieces.
We have gotten the fundamental things like the role and
the hierarchy and the geometry of each element done.
Now we need to report whether it is enabled or
not, or we need to report a description on it.
We need to implement actions, focus testing and
any notifications that might need to be sent.
Now this afternoon, we are going to
be focusing on phase 1 and phase 2,
but the Sketch plus accessibility sample code associated
with this session will give you sample
code that does all three phases.
So part of determining what you want in that
hierarchy is determining roles and sub-roles
and as we saw just a moment ago, it is
programmatically simple to change a role,
you just return a different string constant.
The difficulty sometimes or the thing
that takes more time is figuring
out what is the appropriate role for this situation.
Note that what role you picked very much drives all the
other attributes, actions and notifications that are needed
for that element, because all of
those are very role specific.
Now sometimes picking roles is pretty straightforward.
There is a very obvious mapping between roles
and sub roles-- or to roles and your UI elements.
In this case, we have an image, we have some static text,
we have a button and we have very straightforward mappings
to existing roles, but sometimes
it is not quite so straightforward,
so here is a control, a custom back ball control.
This is a little movie, we will see it in action.
This is a piece of sample code you can download as
well, and this track ball has three degrees of freedom,
and we don't have an AXMarble cool track ball
role, and in fact very often as people innovate
with their user interfaces and come up with cool new
little widgets, there isn't an exact role that matches.
So what do we do in that case?
Well if there is not a clear mapping, we would like you very
much to take a look at the existing roles and find some way
to expose the functionality of
that widget through accessibility.
So in this case, we have three degrees of freedom, we
might make that whole thing a group with three sliders,
with each slider maybe going through the
range of values for the X, Y and Z axes.
Again it doesn't map exactly to what
it looks like, but we wouldn't be able
to provide that with the set of roles anyway.
But at least a Voiceover user is able to get to that control
and manipulate it, and get through the same functionality
or get the same functionality that
a sighted user would have.
And in general as we talk about roles,
what do you do when there is an exact fit?
Well again, don't let a perfect fit be
the enemy of implementing accessibility.
The first thing is, Yes, you should try to
map the visual parts as best as possible.
The reason for this is that very often a Voiceover
user is working in collaboration with a sighted user,
and they are going to talk about this button
or that scroll area, or what have you,
and having it all mapped visually
helps a lot in that collaboration.
But when that is not possible, expose the functionality.
The second thing is to ask, if you are making your
application accessible, I highly recommend that you sign
up for the accessibility-gov mailing
list and if you hit one of these issues
where you are not sure how it should
be made accessible, ask,
because often it is the first time
you are making something accessible.
But the folks on the list have done this numerous times
and might be able to help you avoid some pitfalls.
And then finally, especially if you feel this is a common
UI element, there really should be a role for this,
file an enhancement request in bugreporter
and please include a screen shot,
because occasionally we will get a request and we just have
no idea what kind of UI element you are trying to describe.
There is one other thing to note about roles,
and that is using an alternate role description.
So the role is how an app, an assisted app like Voiceover
finds out programmatically what kind of element this is,
but the role description is a localized string that
is read by Voiceover to the user, and so occasionally,
very sparingly, you might want to use an
alternate role description on an element.
Now the kind of canonical example here is tabs
in a tab view behave a lot like radio buttons.
You select one, you can only have one selected at
a time and you select one, another one de-selects.
And so for accessibility, these are
all reported as AXRadioButton Elements.
That is their role; however, in a collaborative environment,
you have a Voiceover user talking about radio buttons,
and you have a sighted user collaborating talking
about tabs and it gets a little confusing.
In that case and in Snow Leopard, tabs report
their role description as tabs, not radio buttons.
But why should we do it sparingly, well every single
time a Voiceover user encounters a new role description.
They need to work out and figure out how do they
interact with this new user interface element,
and certainly if there are thousands upon thousands of role
descriptions ,and every time you move that Voiceover cursor,
it is something you have never heard of before,
and you have no idea how to use this thing
that is going to be a very frustrating experience.
So the smaller the number of roles that are
described, the easier it is to learn the system.
But again there are these cases like this
tab case, where it makes a lot of sense
to provide an alternate role description.
OK that said, what are we going to do in Sketch?
Well Sketch works out really nicely with the
new roles we have defined in Snow Leopard.
The main view area will be an AXLayoutArea, each
shape is an AXLayoutItem, an item in that area
and then even the handles will be represented,
because they are visual elements, as AXHandle,
the third new role that we have
added in this layout area suite.
So we know how we want that hierarchy to
appear, now, How do we get that to happen?
Well again, we need to do this mapping between our object
hierarchy or the objects that are actually in our Cocoa app
and which ones of those are going to be the backing
in essence for the nodes in the accessibility tree
that we are reporting to an accessibility client.
So take a look at your object hierarchy,
some objects may be ignored.
Sometimes like in this view case, it already implements an
accessibility, so we just may need to override some methods.
And in some cases, we might have objects
that are just inherent from NSObject
and need to implement the entire protocol.
It is maybe 10, 12 methods, not that much, and
sometimes we even have elements that we want to report
that we currently don't even have an analogous object
in our Cocoa application, and we are going to look
at two different cases of this, using a faux UI element,
where we just make up an element out of thin air to respond
to these requests and a proxy element where
we have an object that kind of does the job.
But for one reason or another, we can't use it so we will
create a little proxy that has a reference to that object
that exists already in our app
to pull some information from it.
So if we look at Sketch's hierarchy,
there is an SKT graphic view
and then that graphic view has a
bunch of graphics, graphic objects.
They each know how to draw themselves.
They each know their own bounds, so OK, great.
We will have that view report all of those graphics as
their children, those graphics will be a great place
to implement an NSAccessibility or so I thought,
when I first sat down to make Sketch accessible,
but we do have a bit of an interesting design challenge.
It would be a good word for it, so as is often the
case in drawing applications, what is the word,
usually or very often in drawing applications that we don't
necessarily see in a lot of apps is that the graphic object
in this case, it is the model object
that gets written out to the document,
but it also happens to know how to draw itself in a view.
In a drawing application, very often
the model is also used in the view,
because it honestly makes a lot of sense to do so.
But that gives us an accessibility wrinkle, because
as Sketch exists today, it is a document-based app,
the document holds on to the model objects, the graphics,
it also has a window controller that has its window,
in the window lives in a graphic view and the graphic view
through bindings has a reference back to the graphics.
That is all well and good, and so we could potentially--
that graphic needs to report its accessibility parent--
can only have one accessibility
parent, and so that graphic--
OK, it will report that graphic view as its parent.
Everything seems just perfectly fine, until I looked
at the little to-do list on the Sketch that we may want
to add additional views in another window on the model.
And you have certainly seen this in other drawing
applications where you have a document window open.
Then you open a second window on the same document.
Maybe zoom into 800 percent so you can
do some fine tune work in one window,
while the other window is showing
the results at 100 percent.
And certainly that would be fairly
straightforward to do in Sketch, in which case,
we would end up with a second window controller
with a second window with a second graphic view,
but also using the same underlying graphic objects, the
same model, and when we would report it to accessibility
that one graphic object now has two accessibility parents.
Well that doesn't quite work in a tree where you only
have one parent, so were we to go down this path,
where we would extend Sketch, we would
hit a bit of a bump, a bit of a bump.
So what to do?
We are going to introduce a little
accessibility proxy object.
The idea here is that whenever we need
to return the children of a graphic view,
we will make these little temporary objects, we will set
the graphic view as the parent, we will set the graphic
so now this little proxy has a
reference to its accessibility parent.
And it has a reference to the actual graphic that
it represents, so we can ask it for all sorts
of interesting information like its bounds for instance.
Each of these proxies has a separate parent, even though
it refers back to the same underlying model object.
We are good to go, so from our original
design decision we now have a slight change.
We are going to use a graphic proxy object, it
also will inherit from NSObject and so we will need
to implement the 12 methods of the accessibility protocol.
Let's take a look at doing that now.
So in this demo, we are going to get those
shapes reporting themselves and we are going
to do essentially the phase 2 portion, getting the
hierarchy working, hit testing working and geometry working,
size and position for all of the shapes of the layout area.
Let's take a look at this in progress, so first let's
look at this proxy object, it is very straightforward.
We have an object that holds onto the
accessibility parent and the backing graphic.
We have some properties to get and set-- to read those
values and initF?, method, or actually a factory method
that will take the graphic in the parent and give us back
one of these little temporary objects already auto-released.
Let's take a look at the code behind that, again we are just
going to take the parent and the graphic and hold onto it,
when dealloc, we will release them,
nothing to groundbreaking there and we want
to make sure that accessibility is ignored as No.
Here are the attributes that at least
for this portion, we are going to return.
We are going to talk about the role parent,
the window and the geometry information,
the rest we will get to in a future demo.
And if we look at the attribute values as they are asked by
accessibility, we are a layout item, so we will return that.
We use a convenience function, or it isn't
even a convenience-- you should use it--
an accessibility role description, which
will take a role and an optional sub-role
and return a localized string that
will be presented to the user.
If they ask for our parent, we
return the parent object that we set.
If they ask for What is our window?
or What is our top level UI element?
well we just ask our parent for that because it should
have the information or it will have the information.
For our position, well that graphic that we are
holding onto knows its own bounds, but we also need,
because when we report information to accessibility,
we don't report it in our own view coordinates,
we have to do it in screen coordinates, so we
need whatever view is containing us in order
to do the appropriate translation of coordinate spaces.
So we get hold of our containing graphic view, and that
is simply a method that I have written above that goes
up the hierarchy until it finds its first un-ignored view.
We get our bounds, get our origin,
we check if we are flipped,
and if so we need to adjust what corner we are sending back.
But then essentially we are moving from local
to window coordinates and then from window
to screen coordinates just using standard
Cocoa APIs for doing so, and then we return
and NS value containing the point of our position.
For size, it is even a little easier, we get
our containing graphic view, get our local size
and then we move from our local size to the window size.
The window coordinate space in terms of
size is always the same as the screen's,
so we can take that size, wrap it in NSValue and return it.
So again, the bounds information and the graphic is
already there in Sketch, we are just pulling it out,
translating it to the right coordinate
space and sending it back for accessibility,
and if somebody asks us for something
else, we just return nil.
We don't have a super-class that
has implemented this method,
if somebody wants to hit test, they will hand us in a point.
Now hit testing with accessibility.
If this method is called on your object, it has
been determined by one of your parents that Yes,
this point is either within you or within one of your
descendents, so therefore at the very least at this case,
if this method has been called, at
present, we don't have any children,
we don't have any descendents, so it must be us.
We would return self, but you have
noticed that I have wrapped it
in this function NSAccessibility, un-ignored ancestor.
If for some reason, somebody sub-classed
this class and made it accessibility ignored,
we wouldn't want to return that to accessibility.
What this function will do is, it will take-- it will return
yourself if you are un-ignored, but if you are ignored,
it will walk up the hierarchy to find the first
un-ignored ancestor and return that instead.
And then finally, we have put in stub methods
for the rest of the NSAccessibility protocol,
in case those questions are asked
by an accessibility client.
And the last thing I would like to point out is, whenever
we are making these temporary objects in accessibility,
we will make them, we will use them and then let them
be auto-released, and then when a question comes in for
that element again, we will make another object.
However, to get back to the right spot,
we need to be sure that two objects
that represent the same element respond
Yes to isEqual and hash the same.
And so all I am doing here is ensuring
that we return Yes to isEqual in the case
that we are the same object and that our hash is correct.
OK? And finally, we have got that child object all set up,
let's take a look at what we are doing
in the parent to return those children.
So if we are asked for our children as the graphic
view, we will get ahold of all of our graphics,
we will make an immutable array that we are going to stick
these proxies in, then we will run through all of them.
I am going in reverse because I would
like to send them out in Z order rather
than reverse Z order, which is how they are stored.
And for each child, we will make one of these
little proxy objects, stuff in the graphics,
stuff in ourselves as the parent,
return the array, return the array,
and we have just reported all of
these little objects as our children.
For hit testing, we want to hit test a shape.
And so the point that comes in again is a screen
point, so we will convert it to the window,
convert it down to the view itself and then we are going to
use a method that Sketch is already using for hit testing
to shapes to find the graphic under that point.
If we find that hit graphic, we are going to make one
of our little proxy objects, these temporary objects,
stick the hit graphic in there, put the
reference to ourself in and return it.
And then finally, if we didn't hit a graphic, we just
return ourself or more accurately our un-ignored ancestor.
And with that, we should have phase 2 done for the first
chunk of our hierarchy, the layout area and its items
Let me hide Xcode, go to our sample
document here and bring up the Inspector.
And as I go around, indeed the layout
items report themselves, let's see,
let's focus on one of them and turn on the highlight to see.
Yes, it is reporting its bounds
correctly, it is sizing its position.
Let's test to make sure we can go up the hierarchy
and then come back down using accessibility inspector.
We will navigate to the parent element and indeed,
it is the layout area with the correct bounds.
Let's go back down to the children, maybe the
first layout item, which should be that square.
It is hard to see the highlight there.
Let me go back up and we will take a peek at the line.
And notice that it is the bounds of that line,
all values and accessibility are a rectangle.
And so indeed with what we just did, we now have enabled
half of the hierarchy we are trying to do, excellent.
Let's go back to slides.
So a few things to note about what we just
saw, every element requires a reference
to its parent, because it needs to report its AXParent.
And every element needs some way to have access to
the view that contains it, because every element needs
to report its size and position, so
that containing view is the go-to object
for doing all of the coordinate transformations.
We saw that in this case.
We will see that in this other case as
well, as we talk about these handles.
Oh, one other point about this geometry,
NSAccessibility uses Cocoa screen coordinates.
In Cocoa the bottom left is the origin, bottom left
of the main screen and so all of the coordinates
that you will ever receive, all of the points that you
ever send back will be in Cocoa screen coordinates.
The accessibility APIs, the client APIs take a more
Carbon look at screen coordinates, where the upper,
is that left or right, I can't even tell anymore,
upper right of the main screen is the origin.
And so you will pass a value back in Cocoa screen
coordinates, when you look at it in accessibility Inspector,
which is using the client's screen coordinates, the
value for that point is going to look different.
You didn't do anything wrong, just the transfer,
the translation is happening automatically for you.
The best way to check however is to just turn on
that highlight in accessibility Inspector to ensure
that the right rectangle is being reported on the screen.
There is also that issue of IsFlip that I kind
of went over a little quickly in the code.
Let's talk about that in a little more detail.
So we do have to translate from the view to the window to
the screen for the position, the point that is the position.
If we have a flipped view, then it is going to be the
upper left corner that is what is reported as the origin
of that rectangle in the flipped coordinate space.
But if we just take that point and translate
it to the screen point, that is the wrong spot,
because we really want to report that point
to accessibility, the lower left point,
because that is the point in Cocoa screen coordinates
that maps to the origin that we are looking for.
So if we are flipped, we need to report the
correct corner, so the code that we saw does that.
OK that said, let's get back to mapping
our hierarchy for these handles,
where we don't actually have a handle object in Sketch.
In fact, the way Sketch deals with handles is the graphic
itself just has this e-numb, 1 through 8 for each e-numb.
It is just upper left, middle left, upper
right, and that e-numb value is used a lot
of places in Sketch to represent each handle.
And then the graphic itself does all of the
drawing of the handles, all of the hit testing,
whether a handle was hit, so it can resize and the like.
But we need an object, so when we report an AX handle,
there is some object that those requests can go to.
So we are going to use a fake UI
element, we call it a faux UI element.
This is a very prevalent and useful pattern in making your
applications accessible, so much so that faux UI element,
we ship it in an example, sample code,
so you have the full source to it
and we are reusing that example code as is in Sketch.
I highly recommend any time you hit this case that you
grab the faux UI element sample code and use it as is
and we are going to sub-class it
for the SKT handle element class.
Now that faux UI element, you can search for the
image map example that is where it first appeared.
It is truly the easiest way to provide one of these
elements that appears only for the sake of accessibility.
Let's take a look at doing that.
So we are going to do phase 2, getting the hit testing,
the geometry and the hierarchy correct for handles.
OK, so first let's take a look at SKTGraphic, I needed to
add some additional functionality on the graphic itself.
I needed each graphic to be able
to tell me the handle codes.
Since we are using an e-numb, I just chose to
use an index set so I have an easy way to pass
around a bunch of integers, typically 1 through 8.
Also, since the graphic is the one that knows where
to draw its own handles, I have implemented a method
where I can hand it a handle code and the
graphic will hand me back the correct rect.
I have-- OK, let's take a look at faux UI element.
This is the reusable class and
again it itself, it is very simple.
It is designed to be reusable so
it doesn't have a hard coded role.
When you create one, you set the role, you set the parent.
These little reusable objects, typically the reason
why you need them is because all of the smarts
about that particular thing on
the screen lives somewhere else.
That is why there is no object to represent it, and
that is typically the parent and so faux UI element
that class doesn't know a heck of a lot about anything.
It asks its parent for all of the relevant information, so
it defines this child support protocol to be able to call
to the parent and ask for things like, What is my size?
What is my position?
Am I focused or not?
We won't walk through all of faux UI element, but I did want
to show you first the importance
of isEqual and the hash function.
Again these temporary objects need to compare
as equal if they represent the same element,
and second to show that this faux UI element, if you use
this as your super class, it is already providing a lot
of stuff, the code is already written to handle the role,
role description, whether it is focused, the parent,
window, top level UI element, size and position.
Now our own little sub-class of the handle, we are going
to hold on to the handle code, because that e-numb value.
That single integer value is really what sets one
handle apart from another, lets us identify them.
We have an init method and a convenient factory
method and a method to get the handle code out,
so we are really just a little
wrapper around this single identifier.
The init method, not much to see there, the key thing to
see here is in our sub-class, we have overridden isEqual
and hash to throw the handle code into the mix,
because once we have a parent shape and a handle code,
we are uniquely identified as the correct element.
That is all that is going on in the
handle itself, what we just looked at.
It is all really going on in that graphic
accessibility proxy where the handle
through faux UI element is already correctly reporting its
parents, now we need that shape to report its children.
And really the children are also the handles and the layout
area or layout item reports an attribute of its handles.
So for the children, when we are asked for those,
we will just get our handles and return those.
When we are asked for our handles, if we
are selected, so our handles are showing,
we are going to return an array
of handles, UI element objects.
Otherwise, we will return an empty
array, because we have got nothing.
Let's go take a look at this handle
UIElementsWithHandleCodes,
so we take-- oh let me go back just a moment.
Note that what we are doing to get that set of handle
objects is we ask the graphic that we are a proxy for,
Hey give me your index set of handle codes, then we-- I
have factored out a method that will take that index set
and build the little faux UI elements that we want.
And all it does is it takes that index set of handle
codes, gives me a mutable array that I can stick stuff in
and then I am using a new block enumeration API
on an NSIndex set to run through every index.
For every index, I just create one of my handy
little fake handle objects, stick it in the array,
release it and at the end I have got the
array of children and the array of handles.
That is all it takes to return the children.
For hit testing, again now I have children
that I have to worry about hit testing.
I do exactly what?
Well it is very similar to what I did in the view itself.
I convert the point down to be a local point, I
ask the graphic for the handle under the poin.
And again most applications already
have hit testing implemented.
And then if I have a hit handle, I make
up one of my little faux UI elements
and return it, otherwise, it is my un-ignored ancestor.
And then finally, support for children elements,
well these handles when they are asked for their size
or position are going to ask me, their parent.
So I will take that faux element, grab the handle
code out of it, I will ask that graphic I am the proxy
for the handle-- for the rectangle, then I will
do the appropriate coordinate transformation
and return the screen point.
The same exact thing for size, once I get that bounds
for the handle code, it is easy for me to take the size
and make it into the screen coordinate
space and return that.
And with that we have handles.
So let's take a look at that.
OK, let me not do that, oh dear.
That is the app and if I bring
up the Inspector, let's select,
and if I hit a handle it is reporting that I have a handle.
Actually, these handles are extremely
small, so we can also check
to make sure we actually are doing
correct coordinate transformations.
Let's zoom into 800 percent here, so we can get a good look
at a handle and as we mouse over, indeed we have a handle.
As we lock focus on it, we are getting the geometry right,
let's make sure we can navigate up the tree to a parent.
We can navigate back down the tree to a handle.
And indeed now, we are reporting the layout area, the
layout item and children, the children of the layout item,
which would be its handles when selected.
Let's deselect and we will lock Focus on that item
to make sure that, notice it is a giant shape now
that the children are size 0 because there is no selection.
All right, great, we have just achieved a
giant milestone in the accessibility of Sketch.
Are you as excited as I am?
OK, all right back to slides.
That seriously is a major milestone in
the accessibility of Sketch, so yes.
[ Applause ]
When you have your accessibility
hierarchy for your custom view showing
up in accessibility inspector, you
can navigate up and down the tree.
You are sure that all of the geometry is correct.
You are far and away, well on your way to having
that custom view be very nicely accessorized.
Next comes phase 3, which is working
through the remaining items.
Now again, we have implemented a lot of
the very core attributes, but every--
for instance, the layout area has an attribute of
being able to determine its selected layout items.
We haven't implemented that yet, and in
fact the roles that we chose in step one,
very much determine what we need to do now.
What are the remaining attributes?
What are the remaining actions that we need to implement?
What attributes can the client
not only get information about.
but also set information about?
And in the layout area, we can set the size and
position of a layout item through accessibility.
We can also set the position of each handle, so an
accessibility client should be able to get a hold
of a layout item and move it around
or resize it through accessibility.
Or drill down to an individual handle and move it around.
And whatever that handle does, in most cases
resizing should take that affect in the application.
Or say in Keynote or applications where you have
that little, maybe it is a little rounded rect,
and it has that extra handle that you can adjust
the corner radius that should also be moveable,
so that is an assisted app like
Voiceover could move that handle around.
And tests and a very, very handy, actually
the user default or argument to pass
in when you run an app is NSAccessibility DebugLogLevel 1.
NSAccessibility DebugLogLevel is going to log any time
the accessibility infrastructure and AppKit hits something
that it just doesn't like, something is awry and amiss.
And sometimes you are done with accessibility, but then you
run with this log level, and you realize there are a couple
of rough edges that you realize you have to iron out.
Actually, that helps bring us to trouble shooting.
The first thing that happens when you
are trying to troubleshoot is ensuring
that the parent and the child reporting is correct.
For instance, you could imagine very easily on the one
hand, you have a proxy object reporting its parent,
but in the parent, you accidentally have the
actual graphics being reported as the children.
That is not going to work.
You are not going to see the right
results in accessibility inspector.
The most common thing or reasons that phase two
might go awry is when you have these objects
that are temporary isEqual and hash for the same
element must return Yes that those are indeed equal.
Sometimes you may be returning ignored elements,
because you have not been using those
un-ignored element helper functions.
And again if you have an issue setting
NSAccessibilityDebugLog Level 1 as your best way
of getting a lot of diagnostic information
about what is awry with your app.
Now the last thing I would like to do is take a
look at Sketch, once I have completed phase 3.
And associated with this session should be the sketch, plus
accessibility sample code, which is the completed version
of Sketch and let's take a look at it with Voiceover.
So we will launch this completed version.
Turn on Voiceover.
[ Computer talking ]
Voiceover on, Sketch window, sample sketch
document, layout area, has keyboard focus.
>> [Presenter] OK for those of you who may have been, how
many folks were in the introductory accessibility, anybody?
OK, so a few of you.
In that case, you knew that, or you know, the rest of you
can just imagine, when we turned on Voiceover and pointed
at the sketch document, it was like ahhh.
Didn't know there was nothing there,
it was just a big empty space.
Now we are getting some information.
We are in a layout area.
Let's drill down and see if we
can take a look at those things.
So Voiceover user then says, What is in this?
>> [ Computer talking ]
Interact with area, four items, rectangle, layout item.
>> [Presenter] Oh as part of phase 3, I have added
scriptions, so this now says it is a rectangle.
>> [ Computer talking ]
Line layout item.
>> [Presenter] Line layout item.
>> [ Computer talking ]
Text layout item.
>> [Presenter] Text layout item.
>> [ Computer talking ]
Circle layout item.
>> [Presenter] Circle layout item.
>> [ Computer talking ]
Rectangle layout item.
>> [Presenter] Excellent.
And I don't know if everybody saw the announcement in Snow
Leopard, there is this amazing new feature in Voiceover,
the screen reader on Mac OS X where
a user for the first time is able
to use the multi-touch track pad
as a way of navigating in a window.
And let me show that to you very briefly.
It is especially handy in those views that have a very
graphical layout, so let me turn it on very quickly.
And I use it just here to turn it on.
>>[ Computer talking ]
Track pad commander is already on.
>>[Presenter] And then I am just going to use
one finger and move it around the track pad.
You are going to see a little dot on the screen, a little
circle on the screen that we have here for demo purposes
that will show my finger moving on the track pad.
You will also see Voiceover detailing exactly what
is happening on the screen-- or as I move around.
So there is my finger.
>>[ Computer beeping ]
[ Computer talking ]
Rectangle layout item, line layout item, text
layout item, circle upper left, layout item.
>> [Presenter] So, this is a drawing program?
>> [ Computer talking ]
Layout item.
>> [Presenter] And yet with this track pad
navigator, I am able to as a Voiceover user.
>> [ Computer talking ]
Line layout item.
>> [Presenter] Get a pretty good idea of
where things are in relation to each other?
How large things are in relation to each other?
[ Computer talking in background ]
>> [Presenter] That is pretty cool.
[ Applause ]
That is extraordinarily cool.
OK, we will turn off the track pad navigator.
>> [ Computer talking ]
Track pad off.
>> [Presenter] OK, the next thing I would like to do is,
we can also set values through accessibility,
so let's move this circle around a bit.
>> [ Computer talking ]
Start moving layout item, 190?.
>> [Presenter] Start moving layout item.
>> [ Computer talking ]
140.000
>> [Presenter] So using the arrow
keys through accessibility.
>>[ Computer talking ]
Left, left, up, up, down, down
>> [Presenter] This is not using scripting,
this is not using Sketch's own event handling.
This is through accessibility's API.
>> [ Computer talking ]
Up, right, down, left, right, right 40 points, up 20 points.
>> [Presenter] You can pretend you are marching.
>>[ Computer talking ]
Left, right, left, right, left, right.
[ Laughter ]
>> [Presenter] That is kind of fun.
>> [ Computer talking ]
Stop moving the layout item.
>> [Presenter] Oh sure.
[ Applause ]
Feel free.
And then finally, we have exposed handles with the size
and position, but every assisted application may choose
to do whatever it wishes with the
information your application provides.
And rather than make a really little rectangle on
the screen, when you hit a layout item in voiceover,
it chooses to allow you to access them
through a menu and resize using that handle.
So let's get to that little menu.
>> [ Computer talking ]
Layout item resize options menu, 8 options.
>> [Presenter] Now, I have added in the final
product some descriptions for each of these handles,
so we can tell the different places around.
Let's move around the lower left handle.
>> [ Computer talking ]
Upper middle, right, lower left, resize lower left.
>> [Presenter] And then again, by changing the
position of that handle through the accessibility API,
some other process voiceover is able to do this in sketch.
>> [ Computer talking ]
20.0, 20.0, 20.0 points.
>> [Presenter] We are moving that handle.
There is a little bug in Voiceover
that is not redrawing the cursor.
>> [ Computer talking ]
20.0 points, 20.0 points.
>> [Presenter] But you are the server of information.
That is a client bug, so Sketch is
doing the correct thing in this.
>> [ Computer talking ]
20, 20, 20, 20.0 points.
>> [Presenter] And let's turn off Voiceover.
>> [ Computer talking ]
Voiceover off.
>> [Presenter] And again over the course of this session
and over the course of this week, Sketch which had this kind
of big area that was not accessible at all, now a
Voiceover user can do actually a great deal of stuff
within Sketch through the accessibility APIs.
And we would of course encourage you to
do the same thing with your custom views.
[ Applause ]
So for more information, Eric Hope, our Technologies
Evangelist, again that accessibility mailing list,
when you are doing accessibility for you app,
I highly recommend subscribing to that list.
We have a bunch of documentation, and we also
have an accessibility webpage on apple.com.
This has been recently redone.
It has a lot of great information, both about Voiceover,
about all of the things Apple is doing with accessibility.
It also has a little section where
accessible applications are highlighted.
We love to see accessible applications, and we love to
tell everybody about what applications are accessible,
because there are a lot of people very curious that
are wanting to use your apps through Voiceover.